Integrated Boards Tech Spec
Background
This document contains a description and inner workings of the Integrated Boards feature and its architecture. With this
project, we're planning to address the improvements and shortcomings of the Focalboard project, at the same time that we
develop a feature fully integrated with Mattermost, leveraging existing mechanisms like the information structure that the
platform has, threads for conversations within the cards and the Property System Architecture to empower users to tailor the
Boards workflows to their needs.
Vocabulary

Mattermost Information Structure: this refers to the system > team > channel hierarchy that Mattermost as
a platform uses to structure its data. In the context of permissions or data modeling, this references that the entities within
Integrated Boards will fall under that structure, and will take advantage of it to reuse parts of the platform's domain logic.
Views: a new entity, attached to a channel, that describes a way to represent that channel’s data. Views are stored in the
views table and have a Type field that determines their behavior and structure.
Board: a view with type='board' that contains and organizes cards (posts with type='card' ). A board uses a
configurable property filter to define which cards from the channel are displayed within it, allowing multiple boards in the
same channel to show different subsets of cards. Each board contains a collection of subviews that can be applied to
present its filtered card data in different ways.
Subview: a specific presentation configuration within a board view, stored in the view's table as a JSONB column. Each
subview defines a presentation type (kanban, list, calendar, etc.), filters applied on top of the view's base card selection,
which card properties to display, how cards are grouped and sorted, and other type-specific configuration details. Multiple
subviews allow users to view the same set of cards through different lenses and organizational schemes.

Design Goals
1. Provide an overview of the architecture of the feature.
2. Detail the proposed data model and information flow from the store to the API.
3. Describe the required changes to the Property System Architecture for the implementation, and explain how the feature
leverages the system to meet its requirements.
Scope
1. Enabling users to create, edit, and delete boards within a channel, where each board follows the channel's permission
structure and membership, ensuring that only channel members can access the boards.
2. Enabling users to create custom property fields per board to adapt the workflow to their needs, following the Property
System Architecture approach.
3. Extending the Property System Architecture to provide generic REST API endpoints and websocket events that enable
features to interact with properties through a unified interface, shifting from group based organization to object type based
organization and supporting property hierarchy across system, team, and channel levels.
4. Representing board data through multiple subview types (starting with kanban for MVP), where each subview can be
configured with custom filters, sorting rules, and display preferences.
5. Allowing users to start thread conversations on each card that function identically to standard Mattermost message
threads, with replies accessible from both the board view and the channel's RHS, following standard notification behavior.
6. Displaying card creation events in the channel message feed as rich formatted messages that link to the card in the parent
board, providing visibility to all channel members and enabling quick navigation to the newly created card.
7. Enabling plugins to interact with board properties through an extended Plugin API that adapts to the Property System
Architecture changes.

8. Enabling mobile users to access and interact with boards through dedicated mobile screens that support viewing boards,

navigating cards, editing property values, and participating in card thread conversations.

Out of scope

Team level properties
Telemetry
Shared Channels
Elasticsearch indexing and search integration
Import / export
Data retention
Board templates
Card history, undo/redo
Bulk operations in properties or cards
CLI commands

Background Reading
Property System Architecture Technical Spec
Integrated Boards proposal
UX Decisions on the Property System
Integrated Boards MVP (Figma)
Design Summary
Integrated Boards is a feature that allows Mattermost users to create Boards to structure and present information as part of
a channel. A board is always tied to a channel and follows the same permission and membership structure of it, leveraging
the full potential of the current organizational structure that the platform already has.
The cards within the boards are stored as posts in the database, and they have some particular behaviors and pieces of
data connected to them:
Cards are posts with the type set to card .
When a new card is created, it is shown as part of the channel messages with its details.
Every board has a property filter defined that determines which cards are part of it. There is a special system property
board that is configured as the filter by default when a new board is created, but can be later removed from it by the
user.
Besides the built-in board property, cards can have properties that users or admins create when using the feature. For
the Integrated Boards MVP, those properties can be created at two levels:
At the system level: so all the boards will be able to use them.
At the channel level: boards themselves don't have properties, its channel has them, and users decide which boards within
the channel use them. When a user creates a property on a board, they are really creating it on the channel and attaching
it to the board. If another board in the same channel wants to create a property with the same name, the interface will
offer the one that currently exists in the channel for the board to reuse it.
Board views will have different subviews configured to present the cards in different ways. For the MVP we're only going to
cover the kanban subview, but the model has been designed taking the necessary flexibility into account, as every view will
have specific configuration needs and fields.

The new views entity will come with its own database table, new REST API endpoints to access and manage it and
websocket events for the API client to get updates when necessary, all of them described in detail further in this document.
subviews will be part of the views table, stored as a JSONB field for flexibility, taking into account that currently
the only type of view we will have is a board, but we’ll expand the views usage in the future.
The Property System Architecture's new vision

The Integrated Boards feature is going to be implemented following the new Property System Architecture vision, which
shifts from having the Property System being a flexible framework for other properties to mold and configure to being a
feature on its own, with clearly defined limits on its behaviors and common entrypoints. Instead of having the feature
implement endpoints, websocket events, permissions, etc. to use properties, the Property System will define mechanisms for
this feature (and others) to use in a generic way.
As the system will require of some modifications to get to a point where Integrated Boards can fully use it in this new
capacity, this document will cover as well the requirements, rationale and details on those changes, and at times will
reference how the system used to work in an attempt to explain the reasoning behind a specific change.
Other Proposals

There are two main alternatives that were evaluated for this project, each related with a different area of the final data model.
The first proposal was to avoid using the posts table to contain the cards, and create an independent cards table.
Reusing the posts table for cards requires the table to be optimized for both use cases at the same time, can cause
some performance issues and may require changes in the posts family of endpoints and application layer methods, to
allow for callers to distinguish between messages and cards , that will be stored there. It means as well that API
consumers will need to use the posts family of endpoints to manipulate cards, making the API for Integrated Boards a bit
more difficult to understand, which was one of the complains we already faced with Focalboard.
On the other hand, creating the cards table would have required of a lot of implementation effort to make it work with key
subsystems that we already have working with posts , like the possibility of creating threads of comments within the
cards, the websocket subsystem for client updates and a completely new API, websockets and redux store sections in the
codebase. It would have gone as well against the idea of using root posts as the “atom” of information in Mattermost, that is
the vision of posts being a key piece in multiple features that, enriched with the Property System Architecture, allow users to
adapt the platform to their needs, start threads everywhere and even mix information from different features at some point,
thanks to the fact that all of them are modeled using the same base entities.
The other proposal that was taken into account was the idea of separating the model from the Mattermost information
structure of system, team and channel. Implementations like Focalboard and Playbooks have gone back and forth on their
entities (boards and playbooks) being tied to a channel, so a natural course of action when designing something from
scratch would have been to try and provide with that flexibility of being able to have independent entities for the features to
manage as they prefer.

The motivation to tie new features to this fixed structure is that we can build on top of the platform's model and, like in the
case of using posts for cards, reuse plenty of systems that are already in place. The main two that quickly come to mind
are the permissions and the websocket broadcast mechanisms, which we can directly reuse if all our entities and events
belong to the whole system, a team or a channel. If we would have chosen to have independent boards, we would need
independent permissions to those boards, membership structures and broadcast mechanisms to address board members as
opposed of reusing everything that has already been built for channels.
Drawbacks / Tradeoffs
Overuse of the posts table

The posts table is one of the most heavily utilized tables (if not the most) in the whole platform, and has been extensively
optimized for the channel messaging use case. Any modifications to its schema, indexes or query patterns require careful
consideration due to the table's central role in platform performance.
Integrated Boards introduces a new use case for the posts table by storing cards as posts with type = 'card' .
While this approach requires no immediate schema changes as the type field already exists in the posts table, it
increases the volume and diversity of data in the table, potentially introducing different query patterns for card retrieval
compared to message retrieval in the long run. As card usage scales, particularly in channels with many boards and cards,
this could impact query performance for both card operations and traditional message operations.
Post type differences in the codebase

Introducing cards as a distinct post type may require updates throughout the codebase to differentiate between messages
and cards where their handling diverges. Many existing methods, API endpoints and system processes currently assume all
posts are messages, and while that's an advantage in terms of expanding what can be done with cards specifically and
Integrated Boards as a whole, it may require modifications to explicitly filter by post type in some cases.
From extending API endpoints to return only elements of a given type, to allowing compliance exports to deal with posts and
cards independently on its reports, each area that interacts with posts will need to be evaluated to determine whether it
should handle all post types uniformly or apply type specific logic. While this is a significant effort, it can be treated as
incremental work and addressed as specific use cases appear during development.
Property hierarchy constraint

One of the Property System Architecture's assumptions is that every property is going to be set at either a team, a channel
or the system level. The consequence of this constraint is that features or plugins with entities outside this hierarchy will not
be able to use the property system unless they align their models with it. While this constraint enables infrastructure reuse
and simplifies implementation for channel based features, it reduces architectural flexibility for features with data models
outside of it.
The new Property System Architecture vision requires all properties to be defined at the system, team, or channel level. This
design constraint prevents features and plugins with entities outside the Mattermost information structure from using the
generic property system unless they restructure their data models to align with the hierarchy. While this limitation enables
infrastructure reuse and simplifies implementation for features that fit the channel-based model, it restricts architectural
flexibility for features with alternative organizational structures.

Property System Architecture changes
Group Usage

For the initial vision of the Property System Architecture, property groups were both a way for a feature to specify that
properties belonged to it, and the entrypoint for most if not all the services and queries, as it was intended that each feature
would, in most cases, manage their own properties only.

The new Property System Architecture's vision uses the ObjectType as that logical entrypoint (instead of fetching say,
Data Spillage properties, the client will fetch post properties, that include the Data Spillage ones and others), so the way we
use groups is changing.
It will remain both for backwards compatibility reasons and because it will be useful as a filter when dealing with properties,
but the current indexes and method signatures both internally and in the APIs will change to accommodate this new way of
structuring the information.
A further step that we can take in this direction is to directly remove the propertygroups table in the database, and
change the GroupID field by a Group field that contains directly the group name. The goal of the property groups
table was to extend groups and make them configurable, to allow features to define a set of behaviors for all properties in a
group. As the group is changing its meaning, we are free to remove that level of indirection and use group names directly,
removing the need for clients to know specific group IDs and making APIs easier to use.
Permissions

The current approach for the Property System Architecture has every feature defining its own endpoints to modify its
properties, so each feature can decide what permissions to check and how. With the new vision, we need a generic way to
decide who is authorized to perform operations on both fields and values, that is independent by field.
To achieve this, each field will store (either as an attribute or a permissions column in the database) granular
information about what users can do both on the field itself and on its values. Currently we have the following use cases to
cover:
Users can edit both the field and its values freely.
Users can only add options to the field (for select and multiselect types), and then set its values freely. Only
admins can edit the rest of the field.
Only admins can edit the field, and users can set its values freely.
Only admins can operate on the field, both editing and setting its values.
For audit purposes, we will need to track who has performed each one of these actions, either through our current auditing
system, or by adding the CreatedBy and UpdatedBy columns to the PropertyFields and

PropertyValues tables, so we can easily track these changes but use them as well as part of the information
presented in the frontend.
Protected property fields

To be able to rely on the Property System Architecture, several features need to ensure that their properties are not going to
be updated or deleted by users or an admin, so we need to account for this as a special case besides the ones listed above.
These "protected properties" will not be able to be changed through the API, nor even by an admin, besides allowing admins
or users to update the options for the select and multiselect types.
Examples of these properties would be the status or the assignee properties planned for the Integrated Boards
feature, or several that the Data Spillage feature is using to flag and track post status. The feature should be the only one
capable of modifying those properties through its codebase, knowing that the API will never allow users to tamper with them
outside of its control.
This feature could be extended to be dynamic at some point if necessary, enabling features like ABAC for example to mark a
property as protected when making it part of a policy rule, so no user or admin can update it as long as it's needed by the
policy, and remove its protected status once it's not.

Introduction of the object type column

After the initial phase of properties usage, the philosophy behind them has changed, as well as the way we will use them.
After the redesign, properties are now always attached to a specific object type ( post properties, channel properties,
etc) and that is the main grouping factor for them.
Following this new way of doing things, we need to introduce the ObjectType column to the property field table, which
will indicate which object the property will apply to. This way, a property field for cards in a board will have this shape:
1 PropertyField{
2
GroupID:
"IntegratedBoardsGroupID",
3
Name:
"Rank",
4
ObjectType: "post", // this is a post property, values will point
to a post
5
Type:
"select",
6
TargetType: "channel", // property is set at a channel level
7
TargetID:
"ChannelID"
8 }

Uniqueness

With this change of semantics comes as well a change on the way we define property uniqueness. Before, uniqueness was
enforced by a database index that ensures that there were not two properties with the same name pointing to the same
target in the same group.
1 CREATE UNIQUE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_propertyfields_unique
2
ON PropertyFields (GroupID, TargetID, Name) WHERE DeleteAt = 0;

After the change, properties can be created with a given name for a given ObjectType as long as there are no already
existing properties with that name in their hierarchy, following the Mattermost information structure. This means that two
different channels can have properties with the same name defined on them as that causes no collisions, but that a team and
one of its channels cannot have two properties with the same name, and that a system level property forbids any team or
channel creating properties with the same name.
Generic Property endpoints and websocket events

The feature will be built on top of the new Property System Architecture structure, that changes the way that features
interact with properties. In the initial version of the Property System Architecture, each feature created their own application
entrypoints to use properties, so they could control permissions and domain logic for every action performed over their
properties.
With the new approach, properties work as an independent feature that other features can integrate with, but rather than
having full control over how their properties work, features make use of the different options that the Property System
provides.
As part of the Integrated Boards MVP, we will add a set of generic API endpoints and websocket events to the Property
System Architecture. These changes will be described later in the REST API section of the document.
Existing features

Features like Data Spillage, User Attributes and Playbook Properties are already using the Property System Architecture with
their own endpoints and domain logic. The new generic endpoints will use different entrypoints that bypass that logic, so
they will check a blacklist and will not be able to reference or query any property field or value that belongs to the property
groups of the protected features.

Data Model
The Integrated Boards feature builds on top of the Mattermost information structure (team, channel and post), and requires
as well of an extra entity for its hierarchy, specifically Views. This feature will use views with type='board' , that we
will refer to directly as “boards” through the document.

A channel can contain multiple boards, where each board defines a property filter with a set of conditions that determine
which cards to display. The board will show only those cards that exist in the channel as posts with type='card' and
satisfy its filter conditions. This way, we can have a team channel that contains a board to organize the team's workload,
another one that tracks the candidates being interviewed for an open position, and a third one for the team's meeting
agendas. All cards exist as posts within the channel, but each card will only appear on the boards whose filters it matches.
Each board can have multiple subviews, that describe the type of presentation that the information will have (a kanban, a list,
a calendar…) and the specific configuration of the subview. Things like what filters are applied in the subview or the specific
arrangement and sorting of the cards would be part of this configuration.
Database Schema
Posts

There are no changes specific to the post table. Card posts will have the following specifics:
The type column will be equal to card , which is the main indicator of the being part of Integrated Boards.
The post's message will contain the card's description.
The post's props will contain information that is common to all cards, like the title or the icon .
Views
1 CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS views (
2
ID TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
3
ChannelID VARCHAR(26) NOT NULL,
4
Type TEXT,
5
CreatorID TEXT NOT NULL,
6
Title TEXT NOT NULL,
7
Description TEXT,
8
Icon VARCHAR(256),
9
SortOrder INTEGER DEFAULT 0,
10
Props JSONB,
11
CreateAt BIGINT NOT NULL,
12
UpadteAt BIGINT NOT NULL,
13
DeleteAt BIGINT NOT NULL,
14 );

The views table will contain information about the view itself, its type (for this project, all views will have
type='board' ) details like the description and the icon and timestamps for the edits. It will have as well a Props

JSONB column that will store parts of the view’s configuration that are specific to each view type.
In the case of boards, as the properties for their cards are created at the channel level, we need a way to specify which
properties are in use for each board, and that’s done through Props.LinkedProperties , that contains a list of the
property field IDs that are in use for the board.
Subviews

As part of the Props column, the views of type board will have a key called subviews that will contain a set of
objects describing those subviews. Depending on the subview, the data that they will require to be configured is different,
but we can expect common things like a title , its type (kanban, list, calendar, etc.), a filter to apply to the
cards on top of the main view filter, a list of properties to show or hide, and then things that are specific to each view type,
like the groupBy property for the kanban view, sorting information or operations to apply to list columns, for example.
Although the plan is to take advantage of the flexibility of the Props JSONB column for this initial implementation, there
is potential for this part of the model to be normalized to a column of its own, or even further if we see that is beneficial as
this feature or others that use views grow.
Properties Usage

For the dynamic pieces of information that users will be able to attach to the cards, the Integrated Boards feature uses
properties to represent the card fields and its values. We distinguish two different types of properties: the feature properties

and the user properties.
Feature properties

The main feature property that we have is the Boards property. It is a platform-wide property that connects each card
with its board, and it's later used as the starting point of multiple database queries that fetch boards contents.
Common details of the cards, like the Title or the Icon have been modeled as part of the Post.Props column
of the database, but we could prefer to move them to be system properties of the feature as well.
User properties

Most of the properties that we will have are user properties, that users can create freely from the cards of a board. The
properties are created at the channel level, and added to the list of properties that the board uses. Properties are unique, so
a different board on the same channel cannot create another property with the same name, but the system will show the
existing properties in the channel when the property is being created in case the user wants to reuse them.
Once the property hierarchy is implemented, these properties can be overridden by higher properties in the Mattermost
information structure, so a team property with the same name of a channel property will take precedence over it, and a
system property over team and channel properties.
Database queries

These are some of the most common operations for Integrated Boards and the queries they'd trigger:
Get boards for a channel
1 SELECT * FROM views
2
WHERE type = 'board'
3
AND channelID = '{channel-id}';

Get properties for a channel
1 SELECT * FROM propertyfields
2
WHERE targetType = 'channel'
3
AND targetID = '{channel-id}';

Get posts for a board based on the board property value:
1 SELECT p.* FROM posts p
2
JOIN propertyvalues pv_board
3
ON pv_board.TargetID = p.ID
4
AND pv_board.GroupID = '{boards-group-id}'
5
AND pv_board.FieldID = '{board-field-id}'
6
AND pv_board.Value = '{sample-board-id}'
7
WHERE type = 'card'
8
AND deleteAt = 0;

Get posts for a board with a severity=sev1 and assignee=johndoe :
1 SELECT p.* FROM posts p
2
JOIN propertyvalues pv_severity
3
ON pv_severity.TargetID = p.ID
4
AND pv_severity.GroupID = '{boards-group-id}'
5
AND pv_severity.FieldID = '{severity-field-id}'
6
AND pv_severity.Value = 'sev1'
7
JOIN propertyvalues pv_assignee
8
ON pv_assignee.TargetID = p.ID
9
AND pv_assignee.GroupID = '{boards-group-id}'
10
AND pv_assignee.FieldID = '{assignee-field-id}'
11
AND pv_assignee.Value = '{johndoe-user-id}'
12
WHERE type = 'card'
13
AND deleteAt = 0;

Get posts for a board with a severity=sev1 , assignee=johndoe OR janedoe and status!=todo
filter:
1 SELECT DISTINCT p.* FROM posts p
2
-- severity = sev1
3
JOIN propertyvalues pv_severity
4
ON pv_severity.TargetID = p.ID
5
AND pv_severity.GroupID = '{boards-group-id}'

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

AND pv_severity.FieldID = '{severity-field-id}'
AND pv_severity.Value = 'sev1'
-- assignee = johndoe OR janedoe
JOIN propertyvalues pv_assignee
ON pv_assignee.TargetID = p.ID
AND pv_assignee.GroupID = '{boards-group-id}'
AND pv_assignee.FieldID = '{assignee-field-id}'
AND pv_assignee.Value IN ('{johndoe-user-id}', '{janedoe-user-id}')
-- status is not todo. We left join with all status = todo
-- and exclude them later with pv_status.TargetID IS NULL
LEFT JOIN propertyvalues pv_status
ON pv_status.TargetID = p.ID
AND pv_status.GroupID = '{boards-group-id}'
AND pv_status.FieldID = '{status-field-id}'
AND pv_status.Value = '{todo-status-option-id}'
WHERE type = 'card'
AND deleteAt = 0
AND pv_status.TargetID IS NULL;

Get property values from boards for posts with IDs:
1 SELECT * FROM propertyvalues
2
WHERE groupID = '{boards-group-id}'
3
AND targetID IN ({post-ids});

Permissions model
Integrated Boards leverages the Mattermost information structure to implement its permissions model, reusing existing
channel permissions rather than introducing feature specific ones. Since boards are always tied to a channel, all board and
card operations are gated by the channel's existing permission structure and membership rules. This means that users who
have access to a channel automatically have access to its boards, and users without channel access cannot view or interact
with those boards.
Card operations build upon existing post permissions but require additional flexibility beyond standard post behavior. Users
with create_post permission in a channel can create cards in that channel's boards. However, unlike regular posts
where users typically can only edit their own content, cards follow a more collaborative model where users with
create_post permission can edit both their own cards and cards created by others within the same board. This
divergence from standard post permissions necessitates special handling in the post edit and delete endpoints, where the
type='card' check will bypass the usual ownership restrictions that apply to regular messages. Thread creation on
cards follows standard Mattermost thread behavior, allowing any user who can reply to posts in a channel to create threads
on cards in that channel's boards.

Property hierarchy
The Property System Architecture implements a hierarchical property model that aligns with the Mattermost information
structure, allowing properties to be defined at the system, team, or channel level. This hierarchy is determined by a property
field's targetType and targetID attributes, where system level properties have an empty targetID , team
level properties reference a specific team, and channel level properties reference a specific channel. For the Integrated
Boards MVP, properties will be created at either the system level (making them available to all boards across the platform) or
at the channel level (making them available only to boards within that specific channel). Team level properties are explicitly
out of scope for the initial implementation but the architecture supports their future addition.
Property name uniqueness is enforced within each branch of the hierarchy to prevent conflicts and ambiguity. The
uniqueness constraint ensures that within a given object type, no two properties with the same name can exist at different
levels of the same hierarchical path. For example, if a system level property named "Priority" exists for posts, no channel can
create another post property named "Priority" because all channels inherit from the system level. However, two different
channels that are not in the same hierarchical path can each have a channel level property named "Department" because
they do not create a collision within their respective branches.
When users attempt to create a property that would violate the uniqueness constraint, the system will detect the collision
and prevent the creation. For instance, if an admin has defined a system level property called "Rank" for posts, and a user

attempts to create a channel level property called "Rank" for their board's cards (which are posts), the system will reject the
creation and suggest reusing the existing system level property instead. Similarly, if a channel already has a user defined
"Rank" property and an admin later attempts to create a system level property with the same name, the system will prevent
the creation to avoid breaking existing channel level properties. The user interface will handle these scenarios by showing
existing properties with matching names during the creation flow, encouraging reuse over duplication and maintaining
consistency across the property system.

REST API
There are two main blocks of new API endpoints, those specific to Integrated Boards and its entities, and the ones that are
part of the Property System Architecture, which are generic but will be used by the Integrated Boards feature.
Integrated Boards endpoints

These are the new endpoints that the Integrated Boards feature will use for its own new entities. The payloads and
responses correspond with the view with type='board' JSON representation:
Create a new view for a channel
1 POST /api/v4/channels/{channel-id}/views

List views for a channel
1 GET /api/v4/channels/{channel-id}/views

Show a view
1 GET /api/v4/channels/{channel-id}/views/{view-id}

Update a view
1 PATCH /api/v4/channels/{channel-id}/views/{view-id}

Delete a view
1 DELETE /api/v4/channels/{channel-id}/views/{view-id}

Property System Architecture endpoints

These are the endpoints that will be added as part of the work on the Integrated Boards feature, but will be used for the
Property System Architecture as generic entrypoints for all properties. The URL of these endpoints will have the
ObjectType as one of its components, embracing the new Property System Architecture vision of organizing the
property data around the different Mattermost objects.
Create a new property field for a post
1 POST /api/v4/properties/posts/fields

List post property fields
1 GET /api/v4/properties/posts/fields

Update a post property field
1 PATCH /api/v4/properties/posts/fields/{field-id}

Delete a post property field
1 DELETE /api/v4/properties/posts/fields/{field-id}

List property values for a post
1 GET /api/v4/properties/posts/values/{post-id}

Update property values for a post

1 PATCH /api/v4/properties/posts/values/{post-id}

The domain logic will make sure that the endpoint operations only affect to the properties of the type specified in the URL.
Besides these endpoints, we will need to extend the search endpoints for the objects we add to the property system (only
posts as part of this proposal) to enable filtering by property values.

Frontend
The frontend implementation for Integrated Boards follows a generic, reusable architecture that supports properties across
multiple features while introducing specific structures for board and view management. The Redux store will be organized to
reflect the Property System Architecture's structure, with dedicated sections for property fields and property values. These
sections are designed to be feature agnostic, capable of storing properties from Integrated Boards or any other feature that
uses the Property System Architecture. To facilitate efficient data retrieval, the implementation will include specialized
selectors that filter properties by object type, group, etc., enabling components to access only the relevant subset of
properties they need without processing the entire property collection.
Boards and views will have their own dedicated sections in the Redux store, following the already existing patterns for entity
management. The board section will maintain the list of boards per channel, while the view section will store view
configurations organized by board, allowing for efficient lookups and updates when users switch between views or modify
view settings.
Websocket events
Views

One of the advantages of adhering to the Mattermost information structure is that everything under the Integrated Boards
data model can reuse the mechanisms that we have to broadcast websocket events, so in case that (for example) a board is
updated, we will broadcast that update event to all the members of the channel that the board is linked to.
Property System Architecture

Websocket events will have a generic format for properties, following the object type based organization. These events will
be broadcast to the appropriate scope based on the property's target (system-wide, team specific, or channel specific),
ensuring that only users with access to the relevant context receive property update notifications.

Mobile
The goal of Integrated Boards is to maintain feature parity between the web/desktop and the mobile implementations, from
the MVP and through future iterations, so all the development phases will follow a mobile first approach.

Configuration
The feature will be implemented initially behind a Feature Flag, and the changes to the Property System Architecture will be
fully compatible with the existing features, so they won't need to be protected in any way.

Plugins
Plugins will be able to interact with the Integrated Boards feature through multiple integration points. For property
management, plugins can use the generic REST API endpoints and websocket events provided by the Property System
Architecture following its new vision. Additionally, the Plugin API will be updated and extended to reflect the architectural
shift from group based to object type based organization with enhanced filtering capabilities based on property attributes
rather than solely on group membership.
For board and view management, the Plugin API will include new methods that allow plugins to manage boards and views
within channels, enabling them to build integrations that extend or automate board workflows.
However, plugins face the same architectural constraint as other features regarding which entities a property can be
attached to. Plugins cannot attach properties to their own custom entities unless those entities exist within the Mattermost

information structure (system, team, or channel hierarchy).

CLI
The CLI for Integrated Boards is out of the scope for this document, but in future efforts we could tackle the addition of new
families of commands like mmctl channel board or mmctl channel card to manage the whole feature
from the command line.

Migration
The migration from Focalboard to Integrated Boards is out of the scope of this document, but it will most probably be
implemented through the Mattermost import system. It would need of adding the properties to the JSONL format that the
platform currently uses for importing information, and transforming the Focalboard export into that format before ingesting it
through the currently available entrypoints.
We should take into account when tackling this effort that Integrated Boards will not achieve feature parity with Focalboard
after this first iteration, with things like card history or board templates not being part of the Integrated Boards feature set, so
they should be either discarded or implemented as part of this effort.

Credits
Give credit here to anyone who helped you write the spec or provided feedback to improve it.

History
2nd October 2025: First draft of the document published.
9th October 2025: First version of the document published for review.
15th October 2025: Major update to restructure the data model around views.
Wording
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119

